add chaos testing desription (#40327)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/contributor/testing/chaos-testing.md

# Chaos Testing

Chaos testing is a methodology for verifying the resilience of {{ ydb-short-name }} by deliberately injecting failures into a running cluster. The goal is to ensure that {{ ydb-short-name }} correctly survives real-world failures: node losses, network partitions, disk problems, and other abnormal situations. The **Nemesis** tool is responsible for injecting this chaos.

## What Is Tested

Chaos testing verifies cluster behavior under the following types of failures:

### Network Failures

- Node network isolation (blocking incoming and outgoing traffic)
- System time skew on nodes

### Node Failures

- Forceful termination of cluster node processes
- Stopping and restarting nodes
- Suspending node processes

### Tablet Failures

Tablets are the primary computational units of {{ ydb-short-name }}. Resilience is verified by forcefully terminating various tablet types:

- **Coordinator** — distributed transaction coordinator
- **Hive** — tablet placement manager

> - **BsController** — distributed storage controller

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **BSController** — distributed storage controller
```

То же касается RU-версии стр. 26.

- **SchemeShard** — schema manager
- **DataShard** — data storage tablets
- **Mediator** — transaction mediator
- **PersQueue** — message queue tablets
- Other system tablets

Tablet rebalancing between nodes via Hive is also tested.

> ### Integration with Stress Testing

Reviewer: подсекция `### Integration with Stress Testing` стоит на одном уровне с типами сбоев (`### Network Failures`, `### Node Failures`, `### Tablet Failures`, `### Disk Failures` и т.д.), но **не является типом сбоя**. Она описывает, как chaos-тестирование комбинируется со stress-тестами.

Лучше вынести её отдельной H2-секцией между «What Is Tested» и «How Verification Works», или сразу после «How Verification Works». Сейчас читатель видит в списке типов отказов запись «Integration with Stress Testing» и недоумевает.

То же касается RU стр. 35 (`### Интеграция с нагрузочным тестированием`).

Chaos testing is typically run in conjunction with stress testing workloads from the [ydb/tests/stress](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/tree/main/ydb/tests/stress) directory. This combination ensures that the cluster is tested under load conditions while experiencing various failure scenarios.

### Disk Failures

- Safely taking a disk out of service on a node
- Cleaning up disks on nodes

### Multi-Datacenter Cluster Scenarios

- Stopping all nodes in a single datacenter
- Network isolation of a datacenter

### Bridge Mode Cluster Scenarios

> - Stopping all nodes in a single bridge pile

Reviewer: В документации YDB принят термин **pile** (без префикса «bridge»), со ссылкой на глоссарий — см. `ydb/docs/en/core/concepts/bridge.md:5,11`: «...several [piles](glossary.md#pile) (typically one pile per datacenter)». Сейчас в этом файле введён новый термин «bridge pile», которого больше нигде нет.

Предложение:

```suggestion
- Stopping all nodes in a single [pile](../concepts/glossary.md#pile)
- Network isolation of a [pile](../concepts/glossary.md#pile)
```

Заодно сам заголовок секции «Bridge Mode Cluster Scenarios» (стр. 49) ссылается на bridge-режим — можно дать в нём гиперссылку на `../concepts/bridge.md`. То же касается RU стр. 49–52.

- Network isolation of a bridge pile

## How Verification Works

While failures are being injected, the system continuously checks two aspects:

- **Liveness** — the cluster remains available and continues to process requests
- **Safety** — no signs of data correctness violations or internal system invariant breaches appear in cluster logs and metrics

Failures are injected automatically on a schedule, and check results are aggregated and available for analysis.

## The Nemesis Tool

{{ ydb-short-name }} uses the **Nemesis** tool for chaos testing — a fault injection application located in the [YDB repository on GitHub](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/tree/main/ydb/tests/stability/nemesis). It is deployed directly on the nodes of the cluster under test and manages fault injection according to a configured schedule.

> > **Important:** Nemesis only works with {{ ydb-short-name }} clusters that were deployed using the [`ydbd_slice`](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/tree/main/ydb/tools/ydbd_slice) utility.

Reviewer: вместо `> **Important:** ...` надо использовать  `{% note warning %}` для аналогичных предупреждений. 

```suggestion
{% note warning %}

Nemesis only works with {{ ydb-short-name }} clusters that were deployed using the [`ydbd_slice`](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/tree/main/ydb/tools/ydbd_slice) utility.

{% endnote %}
```

То же касается RU стр. 67.

### Installation

Deploy Nemesis to your cluster:

```bash
# Single-file config (cluster.yaml contains both hosts and database template)
nemesis install --yaml-config-location /path/to/cluster.yaml

# Two-file config (separate cluster.yaml and databases.yaml)
nemesis install \
    --yaml-config-location /path/to/config.yaml \
    --database-config-location /path/to/databases.yaml
```

The first host in the cluster configuration becomes the orchestrator; all other hosts become agents. Services are deployed as systemd units and started automatically.

### Stopping Services

> Stop all Nemesis services on the cluster:

Reviewer: В команде stop используется `/path/to/config.yaml`, а в install (стр. 71) — `/path/to/cluster.yaml`. Чтобы примеры можно было копировать единым блоком, привести к одному имени файла:

```suggestion
nemesis stop --yaml-config-location /path/to/cluster.yaml
```

То же касается RU стр. 87.
